---
title: "Tech is a cyclical industry: booms and busts are normal"
date: 2024-09-16T21:45:00-04:00
showDate: true
---

It's no secret that the tech job market really sucks. Even for me who still has a
job, I'm not exactly keen on my department, I have *many* reservations about my
product, I wanted to move on.

But even when I tried applying for jobs, why should they hire me instead of
someone who's so desperate they'll work for less? This just happened to me
*last week*.

This made me realize, tech is a cyclical industry. There is a new technology
which kicks off a boom. Our last boom was built on mobile. The one before that,
web.

CS grads who were expecting to work on a legacy C++ app instead got better jobs
in SF and NYC at cutting-edge tech companies, which lured more people into tech.
CS grads were paid so much for just four years of education and intenships. CS
grows. Then comes a bubble when tech is at an all-time high. Then it bursts and
there is so many layoffs. People who couldn't make it in tech are forced to leave
and go to non-tech jobs.

These days, if you want to make a lot of money, you become a doctor. Or maybe an
investment banker. You only go into tech if you truly love tech that you'll work
on an unsexy ASP.NET app for your local hospital. You'll use a crappy HP ProBook
without admin rights instead of a shiny new M3 Max MacBook Pro. You'll be able to
make it in Cincinatti or Houston, not SF or NYC. You'll work in a legacy codebase
nobody wants to touch with a terrible UX.

10 years ago, if you wanted to be rich, you became a coder. You only go into
medicine if you truly loved medicine that you'll spend more years in school for a
more physically demanding job. A job with a terrible work-life balance. A job
where you're often on-call. A job where actual lives are on the line, and the
liabilities are huge if you mess up. And you'll be dealing with legacy healthcare
systems instead of a nice UX from cutting-edge tech companies.

Heck, the reason why I became a software engineer instead of working in
networking **was** because I was lured by these cool tech companies, which I came
to regret even if I would've made less in traditional IT.

Even for me, I'm considering turning my eBay side business into a second stream
of revenue (as opposed to selling my used homelab gear) to make me not dependent
on a product I hate, or be in the Big Data Surveillance Capitalism industry that
I want regulated out of existence.

Sure, I might not need more money but I *need* financial independence from a
sub-industry I don't want to be in. And yes, e-commerce is hard too but trying to
get another job is even harder, otherwise I would've left by now.
