---
title: "Web3 is centralized (and inefficient!)"
date: 2022-03-22T20:00:00-07:00
showDate: true
---

These days, an app is "decentralized" if it uses the blockchain. As you
probably already know, this is part of the so-called "Web3" which hopes to be
the next version of the internet.

I'm not the first person to tell you this, and certainly not the last, but Web3
is in fact centralized, just as Web2 was. Web3 is just a worse version of Web2.

# Web3 Platforms are Centralized

A lot of Web3 platforms are in fact centralized. Your wallet (MetaMask),
marketplaces (OpenSea), APIs (Alchemy) are all central platforms. Sure, they
use a distributed database (blockchain), but before that it's still a Go app
on AWS, meaning its centralized.

Look at email, while the protocol is technically "decentralized", but look at
how big *Google Workspace* and *Microsoft 365* is. Sure, you can easily set up
an email server on a $5 VPS, I do it with my domain, but most people just leave
it to big providers. Web3 is no different.

Look at venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, they have a real incentive to
push
[Web3 into centralized monopoly platforms](https://coinyuppie.com/a16z-is-monopolizing-nfts/),
making it become what it was meant to "disrupt".

VCs are built to build monopolies, and monopolies want central control.
Something like Tor or Folding@Home is be somewhat decentralized, since it's a
nonprofit in control and neither Tor or Stanford are for-profit businesses. But
most Web3 firms are for-profit businesses, and so are the VC firms backing
them. They would rather have one big monopoly than a truly competitive market,
and just change the monopoly operator every generation.

If you take the decentralized nature of I2P or DHT, combined with the
distributed computing tech of modern Big Data solutions like Apache Spark\*,
you could get something far more efficient than blockchain. But if everyone if
on the blockchain hype train, then the most credible answer to decentralization
is the worst. It's also sad to see my dad hyping up Web3 in his LinkedIn.

And it's not like these decentralized platforms will go run their own servers
in a colocation center, they still want to use AWS. Meaning Web3 is as
centralized if not more so than Web2 ever was. You can easily run Nextcloud
from your old PC instead of subscribing to Dropbox, but you can't easily host
a "dApp" on your MacBook instead of the public blockchain.

And if Web3 is "decentralized", then why can
[OpenSea take away your NFTs?](https://moxie.org/2022/01/07/web3-first-impressions.html)

Disclaimer: I work at Microsoft 365 in the Exchange umbrella. Despite that, I
self-host my personal email on Postfix, Dovecot, and Roundcube. I am a Tor Core
contributor and relay/exit operator, but less active than before.

\* - I still hate Apache Spark with a *passion*. It makes *systemd* look great
in comparison.

# Mining is Centralized

Once upon a time, it was easy to mine Bitcoin. But Bitcoin took off, and it's
now absurdly hard to mine Bitcoin. You need farms of GPU mining just to get
tiny amounts of bitcoin.

The design of blockchain, is that as more coins are mined, you need more
computing power just to get smaller amounts of blockchain. That's artificial
scarcity. Just when we need to cut emissions more, we are burning through our
planet just to make the top 0.1% richer while people in Indonesia lose their
homes to more frequent tropical disasters.

And even if the environmental concerns were nonexistent, if it's so hard to
mine Bitcoin, it favors established miners over newcomers. Is that really what
you call a "decentralized" platform?

Sure, you can mine Bitcoin yourself, but you'll pay more than what you'll get.

If I didn't become a big FreeBSD person in the early 2010s, I would probably
have been in crypto. I may have even worked in crypto. I in fact did have some
fascination with Bitcoin and crypto back in the early 2010s, and I even had
Bitcoin. But I *loved* FreeBSD too much that I was willing to not mine Bitcoin
just to have a BSD desktop.

Sure, I would have been much richer if I chose Bitcoin instead of FreeBSD. But
I probably would have become a worse person, not having had to work hard since
I'd have 10 million dollars right now. And publicly advocating destroying our
planet for making rich crypto bros even richer while making ordinary people are
forced to leave their homes over more frequent hurricanes and tornadoes.

Yes, I am a FreeBSD "committer", but if I went into crypto, maybe I would be as
involved in Bitcoin's source base, or Ethereum's. But for me to go into crypto,
the ship has sailed a long time ago. But I'm glad I didn't go into crypto.

I did have an internship at a now-dead crypto startup *CacheCash* which hoped
to create a decentralized crypto-based CDN. But they went bust as I accepted
my Microsoft offer which brought me across the US. And CacheCash was
*inefficient* as inefficient could be, like with many Blockchain-based apps.
The Internet backbone is very fast now, but blockchain never will be.

# Blockchain Sucks, Period

Expecting the financial and tech industry to run on blockchain is like
expecting AT&amp;T to run their backbone on a Amazon warehouse sized place full
of 56k dial-up modems. Or wanting to run Google on a cluster of old Compaqs
instead of a much smaller amount of modern servers.

Sure, you could get a 100+ Gigabit backbone (standard on the Internet nowadays)
using 56k modems, but is it as efficient as using fiber optics? **No**, not at
all. And one fiber optic transciever is a dot when compared to 200 million
dial-up modems in size (not an exact count). Blockchain is no different.

One financial transaction shouldn't need more energy than an average household
uses in a month. Having excessive amounts of mining is wasteful. We don't want
to delay the transition away from fossil fuels, but we are just to make a few
white rich crypto bros richer than ever before.

When Miami and Houston go underwater, a16z will be partly responsible. What a
basic enterprise C# app could have done was instead done using a complex web of
blockchain and environment-killing and supply chain-squeezing cryptocurrency
mining.

Sure, Coinbase's CEO will have a Manhattan penthouse in Billionaire's Row while
Miami and Houston are long-gone, they have been overtaken with sea level rise.
And even if your home wasn't overtaken by sea level rise, but you want to build
a PC, it's now unafforable to get a GPU without taking out a mortgate for one.

In the meanwhile, people keep getting scammed out of their crypto assets,
making the 0.1% even richer with no recourse for anyone else, while you have to
live in a homeless shelter since you lost everything, hackers took it all away.

Is this the future we want?

# Decentralization Is Good, Just Not The Way We're Doing It

Just what I said. Blockchain is not the way to decentralization. We need a
hyper-efficient system that takes minimal computing resources to scale to a
whole planet of users, while making it easy for newcomers to join the network.

It's not hard to set up a Tor relay or Folding@Home, so it shouldn't be hard to
add a cryptocurrency miner or node either. But it is. Maybe we're better off
taking out the financial aspect, since not everything has a value.

My domain **neelc.org** costs $11/year to run, but the domain has more
sentimental value to me than what I'd get if I sold it (assuming someone would
buy it). Many things in life simply can't be valued in dollars. After all, the
*Mona Lisa* isn't for sale.

Sure, I work at Microsoft 365, because I had to. It was join Microsoft, or be
dependent on my dad for money. I was pretty much a 100% open source and self
hosting person for very long, and I didn't really want to work on Windows or
.NET for a living, and developing on Windows is still a struggle for me, but I
had to. I don't want my dad to intefere with my life or question my choices. 

But hey, working at Redmond beats taking Miami and Houston underwater just to
make a few white crypto bros happy.
